Okay, I think I figured out a way to do everything with just “build” and “dig.”

How do I...

Q: Turn a floor tile into a wall tile?
A: Build on the tile once to create a slope, and then build on the tile again to create a wall.

Q: Turn an upward slope into a wall tile?
A: Build once on the slope.

Q: Build a passage to the next level up?
A: Build once on a floor tile to create a slope.  If there is no ceiling above, you can reach the next level up.  Otherwise, dig a hole in the ceiling (see below.)

Q: Turn a deep pit or trench into a shallow pit or trench?
A: Build once in the pit.  Do not build above the pit or a worker may place a floor above the slope.

Q: Fill in a pit from above?
A: Build once in the pit to create a slope, then build in it a second time to fill in the pit.

Q: Build a floor in an empty tile?
A: Build once in the empty tile.

Q: Build a ceiling from above?
A: Same as building a floor.

Q: Build a ceiling from below?
A: Build an upward slope directly below, then build on the level above.

Q: Dig a shallow pit or trench in the floor?
A: Dig once on a floor tile to create a downward slope.

Q: Dig a deep pit or trench in the floor?
A: Dig once on a floor tile to create a downward slope; then dig once more either above or on the slope.  Do not dig in the pit if there is an upward slope directly below the tile, or a worker might remove the floor of the pit.

Q: Build a passage to the next level down?
A: Dig once on a floor tile.

Q: Create a tunnel (with floor and ceiling intact) from a wall tile?
A: Dig once in the wall tile.  Make sure there is not an upward slope directly below the tile, or a worker might remove the floor of the tunnel.

Q: Dig a hole in the ceiling from below?
A: Build once on the floor directly below to create an upward slope.  Then dig once in the wall tile above.

Q: Dig a hole in the ceiling from above?
A: Same as digging a shallow pit.

(note: this system has not yet been implemented.)

It occurs to me there is still one ambiguous circumstance...if there is an upward slope directly below a pit you want to deepend, but you can't reach the upward slope to remove it; alternatively, you haven't explored the space so you don't know the slope is there.  Two rules can help resolve this: First, if you haven't explored the slope, it doesn't count.  Second, if you mark the slope as forbidden, it doesn't count.

Might I call these things "sigils" or "wards" or "glyphs" or something?

"inscribe sigils"

"forbidden sigil" : zombies will avoid this sigil
"warding sigil" : zombies will guard this sigil
"hoarding sigil" : zombies will bring goods to this sigil
"unearthing sigil" : zombies will remove earth around this sigil
"constructing sigil" : zombies will create constructions around this sigil
"dismantling sigil" : zombies will 
"erase sigils"
